 13.0 Deorbit Systems - NASA Explore Search News & Events News & Events News Releases Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts & Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Events Upcoming Launches & Landings Virtual Guest Program Multimedia Multimedia NASA+ Images NASA Live NASA Apps Podcasts Image of the Day e-Books 3D Resources Interactives STEM Multimedia NASA Brand & Usage Guidelines NASA+ Search Suggested Searches Climate Change Artemis Expedition 64 Mars perseverance SpaceX Crew-2 International Space Station View All Topics A-Z Home Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA Español News & Events Multimedia NASA+ Featured 6 min read What You Need to Know About NASA’s SpaceX Crew-13 Mission article 2 days ago 3 min read NASA’s DAVINCI Beats Heat in Preparation for Blistering Venus Descent article 6 days ago 1 min read NASA’s Hubble Telescope Reaches Milestone, Looks for Elusive Supernova article 6 days ago Back Missions Search All NASA Missions A to Z List of Missions Upcoming Launches and Landings Spaceships and Rockets Communicating with Missions Artemis James Webb Space Telescope Hubble Space Telescope International Space Station OSIRIS-Rex Humans in Space Why Go to Space Astronauts Commercial Space Destinations Spaceships and Rockets Living in Space Earth Explore Earth Science Climate Change Earth, Our Planet Earth Science in Action Earth Multimedia Earth Data Earth Science Researchers The Solar System The Sun Mercury Venus Earth The Moon Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto & Dwarf Planets Asteroids, Comets & Meteors The Kuiper Belt The Oort Cloud Skywatching The Universe Exoplanets The Search for Life in the Universe Stars Galaxies Black Holes The Big Bang Dark Energy Dark Matter Science Earth Science Planetary Science Astrophysics & Space Science The Sun & Heliophysics Biological & Physical Sciences Lunar Science Citizen Science Astromaterials Aeronautics Research Human Space Travel Research Aeronautics Science in the Air NASA Aircraft Flight Research Innovation Supersonic Flight Air Traffic Solutions Green Aviation Tech Drones & You Technology Technology Transfer & Spinoffs Space Travel Living in Space Lunar Surface Technology Manufacturing and Materials Robotics Science Instruments Computing Learning Resources For Kids and Students For Educators For Colleges and Universities For Professionals Science for Everyone Requests for Exhibits, Artifacts, Speakers & Flyovers STEM Engagement at NASA About NASA NASA's Impacts Centers and Facilities Directorates Organizations People of NASA Careers Internships Our History Doing Business with NASA Get Involved Contact NASA en Español Ciencia Aeronáutica Ciencias Terrestres Sistema Solar Universo News & Events News Releases Recently Published Video Series on NASA+ Podcasts & Audio Blogs Newsletters Social Media Media Resources Events Upcoming Launches & Landings Virtual Guest Program Multimedia NASA+ Images NASA Live NASA Apps Podcasts Image of the Day e-Books 3D Resources Interactives STEM Multimedia NASA Brand & Usage Guidelines Featured 6 min read NASA Highlights Lessons Learned From Swift Boost Mission article 1 day ago 6 min read What You Need to Know About NASA’s SpaceX Crew-13 Mission article 2 days ago 3 min read NASA’s Roman Team Confirms Ground Stations Receiving Data article 5 days ago Highlights 3 min read NASA Opens 2027 Human Lander Challenge for Lunar Communications article 7 hours ago 2 min read Researchers: Help NASA Prevent Blood Clot Formation in Space article 4 days ago 4 min read NASA to Study Human Health, Performance During Crew-13 Mission article 6 days ago Highlights 4 min read Powerful Storms Continue to Prowl the Pacific article 40 minutes ago 4 min read Fire Cloud with a Pileus on Top article 1 day ago 4 min read Uncovering the Valleys Hidden Below Greenland’s Ice article 2 days ago Highlights 2 min read October’s Night Sky Notes: Spooky Stargazing article 1 day ago 3 min read Embracing the Equinox article 1 week ago 5 min read NASA Discovery Reveals Complex Water Systems on Early Mars article 1 week ago Featured 6 min read NASA Highlights Lessons Learned From Swift Boost Mission article 1 day ago 2 min read Circling the Black Hole at the Photon Sphere article 4 days ago 2 min read Circling the Black Hole article 4 days ago Highlights 6 min read NASA Highlights Lessons Learned From Swift Boost Mission article 1 day ago 4 min read Uncovering the Valleys Hidden Below Greenland’s Ice article 2 days ago 0 min read MVP-Plant-02 article 3 days ago Highlights 10 min read 2026-2027 DWU: Middle School Design Challenge article 4 days ago 9 min read 2026-2027 DWU: High School Engineering Challenge article 4 days ago 4 min read NASA Modernizes Commercial Airline Systems article 6 days ago Highlights 4 min read Powerful Storms Continue to Prowl the Pacific article 40 minutes ago 5 min read Reliable Robots: Meet Johnson’s Dexterous Robotics Team article 2 days ago 5 min read Explosive Intensification for Hurricane Polo article 5 days ago Featured 2 min read NASA Opens Applications for Second Season of ORBIT Student Challenge article 13 hours ago 2 min read NASA Astronaut to Answer Questions from New Hampshire Students article 1 week ago 2 min read NASA Kicks Off Nationwide Effort to Prepare Tomorrow’s Space Workforce article 1 week ago Featured 4 min read NASA Modernizes Commercial Airline Systems article 6 days ago 5 min read NASA Unveils Winning Designs for Mars Space Food Systems Challenge article 5 days ago 3 min read NASA Celebrates as Artemis Accords Surpasses 75 Signatories article 2 days ago Highlights 11 min read La NASA anuncia la cobertura de la misión lunar Artemis II article 6 months ago 15 min read Agenda diaria de la misión a la Luna de Artemis II de la NASA article 7 months ago 6 min read La NASA refuerza Artemis: añade una misión y perfecciona su arquitectura general article 7 months ago State-of-the-Art of Small Spacecraft Technology S3VI Home State-of-the-Art (SoA) Summary SoA Chapters 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Complete Spacecraft Platforms 3.0 Power 4.0 In-Space Propulsion 5.0 Guidance, Navigation, and Control 6.0 Structures, Materials, and Mechanisms 7.0 Thermal Control 8.0 Small Spacecraft Avionics 9.0 Communications 10.0 Integration, Launch, and Deployment 11.0 Ground Data Systems and Mission Operations 12.0 Identification and Tracking Systems 13.0 Deorbit Systems Acknowledgements State-of-the-Art of Small Spacecraft Technology 13.0 Deorbit Systems May 7, 2026 PDF (1.49 MB) Chapter Contents Chapter Glossary 13.1 Introduction 13.2 Orbital Debris Regulations 13.2.1 Considerations for Orbital Lifetime Requirements in LEO 13.3 State-of-the-Art – Passive Deorbit Systems 13.3.1 High TRL Drag Sails 13.3.2 Deployable Booms 13.3.3 Electromagnetic Tethers 13.3.4 Natural Deorbiting Highways 13.4 State-of-the-Art – Active Deorbit Systems 13.4.1 Active Debris Removal Hardware 13.4.2 Active Debris Removal / Spacecraft Reentry Services 13.5 Summary References Chapter Glossary (ACS3) Advanced Composite Solar Sail System (ADCS) Attitude Determination and Control System (ADE) Aerodynamic Deorbit Experiment (ADR) Active Debris Removal (AFRL) Air Force Research Laboratory (BC) Ballistic Coefficient (CLEAR) Clearing of the LEO Environment with Active Removal (COPUOS) Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COSMIC) Cleaning Outer Space Mission through Innovative Capture (CRD2) Commercial Removal of Debris Demonstration (CSTT) CubeSat Terminator Tape (D3) Drag Deorbit Device / D-Orbit Decommissioning Device (DLR) German Aerospace Center (DOM) Deorbit Mechanism (EOL) End-of-Life (ESA) European Space Agency (ESEO) European Student Earth Orbiter (FAA) Federal Aviation Administration (FCC) Federal Communications Commission (GCD) Game Changing Development (GTO) Geostationary Transfer Orbit (HPS) High Performance Space Structure Systems (IADC) Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee (ISS) International Space Station (JAXA) Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (LEO) Low-Earth Orbit (MSFC) Marshall Space Flight Center (NSTT) NanoSat Terminator Tape (ODMSP) Orbital Debris Mitigation Standard Practices (RPO) Rendezvous and Proximity Operations (SBIR) Small Business Innovation Research (SSO) Sun-synchronous Orbit (SSR) Space Sustainability Rating (SSTL) Surrey Satellite Technology Ltd. (STMD) Space Technology Mission Directorate (TES-n) Technology Educational Satellite series (TRL) Technology Readiness Level (TTP) Thermosphere Test Probe (UN) United Nations (UTIAS-SFL) University of Toronto Institute for Aerospace Studies Space Flight Laboratory (WEF) World Economic Forum 13.1 Introduction Space debris, also known as orbital debris or space pollution, are derelict artificial objects left in space on purpose or accidentally that include larger nonfunctional spacecraft and rocket bodies, and smaller disintegrated mission-related objects such as lens caps, ejected bolts, or even paint flakes. Additionally, larger space debris are commonly broken up into even smaller fragments due to collisions, erosion, or expelled particles from spacecraft or rocket bodies. This presents a major problem in the space environment as spacecraft can be damaged or destroyed by space debris collisions due to the very high velocities of the debris objects, which then produces even more space debris. While space debris is present throughout space, there is a large accumulation around Earth, particularly in low-Earth orbit (LEO), where most space operations take place. This is also attributed to the increased launch cadence of small spacecraft and the recent surge in constellations over the past decade. Improved access to space has made LEO accessible and less expensive for more countries, organizations, and institutions to launch small spacecraft, which adds to the associated risks and threats of space debris. Estimates of the accumulation of orbital debris suggest approximately 1,100,000 objects with a diameter 1–10 cm, and over 36,500 pieces with diameters >10 cm, are in orbit between geostationary, equatorial, and LEO altitudes (1). Figure 13.1 shows a representation of the orbital debris around Earth. Additionally, the orbital lifetime of space debris can be extremely long since atmospheric drag is only effective at altitudes below ~250 km (2). Figure 13.1: Orbital debris around Earth. Credit: NASA. Due to the inherent problem of space debris, there are ongoing policy measures to establish the importance of mitigating and removing space debris. The general guideline is that spacecraft in LEO must deorbit, also known as decay, or be placed in a graveyard orbit within a maximum of 25 years after the completion of their mission (3). This standard spacecraft lifetime regulation has been recently updated to direct NASA and other national agencies to reassess current mitigation policies, especially regarding the potential advantages and cost implications resulting from limits on the orbital debris lifetime limits (4). These regulations have incorporated spacecraft decay capabilities into mission design. The rate of spacecraft decay in LEO depends on several factors, including initial orbit parameters, the ballistic coefficient of the spacecraft, and solar weather conditions, all of which play a fundamental role in compliance with decommissioning regulations. Small spacecraft designers have examined various strategies for complying with decommissioning regulations to accelerate spacecraft decay post mission: spacecraft may be launched into lower orbits to enable natural decay within a few years, or equipped with deorbit systems to accelerate altitude decay and eventual reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. Natural decay in <5 years can be achieved for most SmallSats at altitudes <400 km, however several SmallSat missions must be in orbits beyond 400 km requiring the use of deorbit methods. Spacecraft deorbit methods are either passive or active. Passive deorbit methods have gained maturity since the last iteration of this report, and there are more devices with high Technology Readiness Levels (TRL≥8) capable of satisfying current lifetime requirements. Traditionally, passive systems were the main option for deorbiting due to their increased simplicity, however recently active methods are gaining traction. Common active deorbiting approaches require attitude control and, in some cases, surplus propellant post-mission, such as a steered drag sail that relies on a functioning attitude control system, or on actuators for pointing the sail. Propulsion devices for deorbiting techniques are considered risky due to potential failure or malfunction of either the spacecraft, throughout its operational life, or the propulsive technology itself. Adequate attitude control and navigation capabilities after the mission for a controlled reentry are never a guarantee. Some of the new active deorbiting solutions include a separate spacecraft that can attach to the defunct satellite to bring it down to lower orbits where the satellites can complete deorbit using atmospheric drag. The influx of small spacecraft in LEO has driven the development of space situational awareness and space traffic management data. For more information, please see the Identification and Tracking Systems chapter. Chapter Organization This chapter is organized as follows: Orbital Debris Regulations (13.2) State-of-the-Art – Passive Deorbit Systems (13.3) State-of-the-Art – Active Deorbit Systems (13.4) Orbital space debris has been a known issue, and there has been ongoing research in this field. It is now a hot topic item, and the Orbital Debris Regulations section provides an overview of current policies for deorbit mitigations, their origins, and the organizations responsible for implementing orbital debris regulations. The Passive and Active Deorbit System sections contain technology descriptions, summary tables of devices, and previous, current, and planned missions. This chapter provides a comprehensive guide to existing commercial technologies and technology demonstrations for both methods, and the authors have attempted to highlight technology gaps and the current development status of each deorbit method. The information described below is not intended to be exhaustive but provides an overview of current state-of-the-art technologies and their development status as discussed in open literature. Companies mentioned in this chapter are presented as informational only and do not represent an endorsement by NASA. There is no intention of mentioning certain companies and omitting others based on their technologies or relationship with NASA. It should be noted that TRL designations may vary with changes specific to payload, mission requirements, reliability considerations, and/or the environment in which performance was demonstrated. Readers are highly encouraged to reach out to companies for further information regarding the performance and TRL of the technologies described. Definitions Disposal refers to removal of spacecraft from the orbital environment. Deorbit refers to lowering spacecraft’s orbital altitude, also referred to as decay. Decay refers to a gradual decrease of the distance between a spacecraft and the Earth. Atmospheric Drag refers to molecular collisions with the spacecraft body. Drag Area refers to the spacecraft surface area experiencing atmospheric resistance. Orbital Lifetime refers to the total time a spacecraft remains in orbit. 13.2 Orbital Debris Regulations Space debris has been a concern for several decades, but with visible sightings of reentry fragments of spacecraft and rocket bodies, the urgency to address space debris has grown. NASA’s Orbital Debris Program Office 1 was created in 1979, and the Air Force Space Debris Research Program was initiated in the 1980s. NASA was among the first organizations to implement plans for mitigation and remediation of space debris in the early 1990s, and in 1993 the Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee (IADC) was founded as an international body. NASA collaborated with the Department of Defense in 1997 to develop the U.S. Government Orbital Debris Mitigation Standard Practices (ODMSP) (5). The agency’s most recent orbital debris guidelines can be found in NASA NPR 8715.6B “NASA Procedural Requirements for Limiting Orbital Debris and Evaluating the Meteoroid and Orbital Debris Environments” (6) and NASA Standard 8719.14C “Process for Limiting Orbital Debris” (3). These technical documents describe the processes and requirements to limit orbital debris for all NASA spacecraft missions. The guidelines, among other considerations, include a limit on the risk of potential human casualties caused by reentering debris, which shall not exceed 1 in 10,000 (5). Of the three spacecraft disposal methods identified – direct retrieval, atmospheric re-entry, and maneuvering into a storage orbit – atmospheric reentry was deemed the most feasible for most spacecraft missions. Therefore, a maximum 25-year post-mission orbital lifetime (no longer than 30 years after launch or relocation to a graveyard orbit for safe storage) was established for all U.S. spacecraft. The rationale for this specific orbital lifetime was based on the minimum propellant required to maneuver to a lower orbit, as predicted by orbital debris models (7). The IADC is an entity formed by national and multi-national space agencies, including NASA, ESA, JAXA, and several others, and is widely recognized by the international community as the technical authority on space debris. In 2002, the IADC established the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines to address orbital debris. Their findings and procedures are submitted to the United Nations (UN), as space debris has been one of the main interests of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS). In 2007, mitigation guidelines based on the IADC procedures were accepted by the COPUOS and endorsed by the UN (5). The IADC adopted the 25-year orbital lifetime guideline for space objects in LEO. The U.S. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulates all radio communication across the U.S. and all U.S. spacecraft must be licensed for space communications. Since the early 2000s, the FCC has deliberated over how best to mitigate orbital debris from FCC-authorized space activities and formally adopted debris mitigation regulations (2) in 2004. These FCC regulations include orbital debris mitigation plans as part of license applications, and require applicants to disclose “the design and operational strategies that they will use, if any, to mitigate orbital debris,” and to “identify particular methods by which a proposed satellite system will mitigate orbital debris” (2). The FCC adopted the ODMSP 25-year lifetime guideline as well and commented that the 25-year “rule” should be tightened, as this no longer adequately addresses current orbital debris issues arising from the launch of large constellations and the expected increase in future LEO space activity. In September 2022, the FCC adopted a new rule for all FCC-licensed satellites within the LEO region (<2000 km) to reduce the lifetime requirement to 5 years post-launch (8). There are ongoing discussions at the agency and federal level to determine the final policies. Since this updated “5-year lifetime rule” by the FCC, there has been increased focus on space debris removal activities. In April 2023, the FCC created a new Space Bureau responsible for the regulation of satellites and space debris (9). The World Economic Forum (WEF) released the “Space Industry Debris Mitigation Recommendations” document in June 2023 to standardize a series of recommended behaviors for satellite operations. One of these listed recommendations is to target five years or less after end-of-life for spacecraft removal. The document was signed by several companies including Airbus, The Aerospace Corporation, SES, and Planet. The WEF collaborated with ESA, the MIT Media Lab, and other stakeholders to establish a Space Sustainability Rating (SSR) system to provide a measurable score to characterize spacecraft mission compliance with international space debris mitigation guidelines (10)(11). The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) announced in September 2023 a proposal to create a new rule to limit the growth of debris from commercial launch vehicles to reduce collision risk and limit space debris in populated LEO environments (12). The new regulation will give commercial launch operators specific options for orbital debris countermeasures, requiring disposal of their rocket upper stages by performing a controlled reentry within 30 days after mission completion, moving them to a less congested or graveyard orbit (within 30 days), placing them in an Earth escape trajectory (within 30 days), retrieving them with active debris removal within five years after launch, or performing an uncontrolled atmospheric disposal within 25 years. 1 https://www.orbitaldebris.jsc.nasa.gov/ 13.2.1 Considerations for Orbital Lifetime Requirements in LEO Small spacecraft launched at or around 400 km altitude naturally decay in under five years, however at orbital altitudes beyond 500 km, there is no guarantee the spacecraft will deorbit within that timeframe, and some may not deorbit within 25 years. This is due to low atmospheric density and its effect on ballistic coefficient, as seen in Figure 13.2. This graph displays various cases of SmallSats with distinct masses, drag areas, and initial orbits, under atmospheric density conditions corresponding to solar cycle maximum and minimum over the 11-year solar cycle. Figure 13.2: Initial orbit altitudes yield different lifetimes depending on the ballistic coefficient of the spacecraft. Three representative area-to-mass ratios are shown. Note that the propagation stops at 16 years, but the initial altitudes yield even longer times. Credit: NASA. The varying solar weather conditions can affect the deorbit performance for a given altitude and can have a significant impact on orbital lifetimes. The atmospheric drag force that satellites experience is increased during solar maximum, resulting in a faster decay. In this situation, the Sun emits extra energy into the atmosphere and creates higher density layers in LEO that produce stronger drag forces on satellites (13). It is common for some missions to plan their launch periods around the solar cycle; if the stricter 5-year orbital lifetime requirement becomes widely accepted, more operators may consider this approach, as the deorbit time can be reduced by more than 10 years as seen in Figure 13.2. Another important factor that affects orbit propagation in LEO is the spacecraft’s ballistic coefficient (BC). Spacecraft BC is defined in this chapter as the mass to area ratio multiplied by the inverse of the drag coefficient, assumed to be 2.2. By this definition, a spacecraft with a lower ballistic coefficient will decay faster due to lower mass-to-area ratio. As shown in Figure 13.2, a 6U spacecraft with an area of 0.06 m 2 and an assumed mass of 6 kg has a ballistic coefficient of 45, which is significantly lower than that of a 100 kg spacecraft with an area of 0.5 m 2 and a BC of 90. Since timing the launch for a particular solar weather scenario may not be feasible, another strategy for satellite operators to comply with orbital lifetime requirements is to decrease their spacecraft ballistic coefficient or mass to area ratio. Deorbit technologies such as drag devices can effectively increase the spacecraft’s drag area and may play an increasingly important role in LEO operations. 13.3 State-of-the-Art – Passive Deorbit Systems Passive deorbit methods require no further active control after deployment, relying only on natural perturbations and forces to deorbit the spacecraft. They are popular for their minimal mass, power, and cost constraints, and high reliability characteristics. Passive methods consist of a deployed structure, such as a drag sail, boom, or electromagnetic tether, to reduce the spacecraft’s ballistic coefficient. This raises atmospheric drag on the spacecraft, accelerating the reentry process. These techniques have greatly matured in the last ten years, and recent developments have made passive deorbit technology well understood and space-ready. This section provides information on drag sails, deployable booms, and electromagnetic tethers. In the last decade, there have been several SmallSat missions that have demonstrated passive deorbit capabilities with a deployed sail, boom, or tether. Some notable deorbit missions led by academic programs, research institutions and government organizations, and commercial entities are described under Missions for each deployed structure. 13.3.1 High TRL Drag Sails Drag devices are the most common deorbit technology for satellites orbiting in LEO. They are advantageous due to simplicity and small stowed volumes. For certain area-to-mass ratios in altitudes equal to or lower than 800 km, drag devices can be deployed to increase the drag area for faster deorbiting to meet emerging 5-year requirements. This technology has been implemented in several small spacecraft missions, and several companies and institutions are developing prototypes that are increasingly more mature, providing solutions for missions that lack the resources for active deorbit systems. Many mission designers are discovering that drag sails do not need to be complicated in material or shape to be effective. It is important to note that some missions described below are better documented due to publicly available data. Table 13-1, located at the end of this section, summarizes state-of-the-art passive deorbit systems. Solar sail technology development and mission information are found in the In-Space Propulsion chapter. Missions In January 2011, the NanoSail-D2 mission successfully demonstrated a drag sail to deorbit the spacecraft from a 650 km altitude and 72° inclined orbit. NanoSail-D2 was deployed from the minisatellite FASTSat–HSV to demonstrate the deorbit capability of a low-mass, high surface area sail. The 3U spacecraft, developed at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) and Ames Research Center (ARC), reentered Earth’s atmosphere in September 2011. CanX-7 started at an initial ~700 km Sun-synchronous orbit (SSO), deployed a drag sail in May 2017 and re-entered April 2022. The thin film sail—developed and tested at University of Toronto Institute for Aerospace Studies Space Flight Laboratory (UTIAS-SFL)—consists of four modules, each providing 1 m 2 of drag area (see Figure 13.3). Each sail section deployed mechanically with spring booms, preserving geometry and incorporating separate electronics for individual telemetry and command to mitigate risk of single-point failures. This is useful for custom adaptability to various spacecraft geometries and ballistic coefficient requirements for other missions (14). Figure 13.3: CanX-7 deployed drag sail during testing. Credit: Cotten et al. (2017). The Surrey Space Centre, based in the United Kingdom, developed DragSail technology that was implemented in a family of missions. Funded by the European Commission QB50 program and the DEPLOYTECH partnership that included the German Aerospace Centre (DLR) and NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, among others, the Inflatesail 3U CubeSat first demonstrated the DragSail in 2017 and included a mast/drag-sail technology that successfully deorbited the satellite in just 72 days. This achievement was the first time a spacecraft has deorbited using European inflatable and drag-sail methods (15). The RemoveDebris mission, developed under the European Commission FP7 program by a consortium of several institutions such as Airbus and the Surrey Space Centre, consisted of a 100 kg spacecraft, deployed from the ISS in 2018. One of the experiments it carried was a passive drag augmentation device consisting of a sail. The sail was deployed in March 2019, however, trajectory data indicated only partial deployment, as no significant altitude change was observed. The lessons learned from this incident were implemented in another version for the Space Flight Industries’ SSO-A mission that incorporated two of these sails. In that case, the assembly did not include an inflatable boom (15). As part of the ESA CleanSat program, Cranfield Aerospace Solutions developed a variety of drag augmentation systems called Icarus which are similar to other drag devices where drag is increased by deploying a membrane sustained by rigid booms. The first demonstration was the Icarus-1 sail that flew on the TechDemoSat-1 mission from SSTL launched in 2014 and re-entered May 2019. Another version also flew on the Carbonite-1 spacecraft, also built by SSTL and launched in 2015. The Icarus sail is a thin aluminum structure located around the satellite side panel that contains four stowed Kapton trapezoidal sails and booms. The Icarus-1 sail system had a mass of 3.5 kg for about 5 m 2 of sail area, and the Icarus-3 sail had a mass of 2.3 kg for 2 m 2 sail area (Figure 13.4). Another technology developed by Cranfield Aerospace Solutions is a de-orbit mechanism (DOM) device like the Icarus drag sail but in a smaller cuboid outline. The mechanical system varies from Icarus since the sails are triangular and the booms work as tape springs themselves. This system flew on the European Student Earth Orbiter (ESEO) that was a 45 kg satellite with several student payloads launched in March 2018. The DOM module has a mass of 0.5 kg and will deploy a sail with an area of 0.5 m 2 to deorbit ESEO after decommissioning (16). Figure 13.4: Icarus-3 drag sail implemented in the Carbonite-1 mission. Credit: Cranfield Aerospace Solutions. The Spinnaker product line of drag sails that focus on low size, weight, power, and cost (SWaP-C) and a reliable approach to meeting FCC deorbit requirements by Applied Aerospace & Defense (acquired Vestigo Aerospace in 2026). Launched in March 2025, the Sphinx mission consisted of a 32 kg Astro Digital Corvus‑Micro microsatellite and deployed an 18.8 m² Spinnaker 3 drag sail intended to dramatically shorten orbital lifetime and generate engineering telemetry and imagery of deployment (17). This demonstration is to support upcoming tests of deorbiting upper rocket stages. MMA Design LLC patented the dragNET de-orbit system, which is a 2.8 kg module (Figure 13.5 [top]) featuring four stowed thin membranes that deploy through a single heater-powered actuator. The sail has an area of 14 m 2 that can effectively deorbit a 180 kg spacecraft at an altitude of 850 km within 10 years (18). The dragNET was a part of the ORS-3 Minotaur Upper Stage and facilitated its deorbit 2.1 years after launch in November 2013. In October 2022, the dragNET deorbit system was launched as part of the General Atomics GAzelle satellite, as seen in the lower image of Figure 13.5, and is still operational (19). NPC Spacemind developed and launched a series of CubeSat missions that demonstrated their ARTICA deorbit system, which consists of a deployable 2.1 m 2 drag sail. The total size of the deorbiting system is 0.3 U which makes it suitable for CubeSats as small as 1U (20). In November 2022 and in January 2023, the DanteSat 3U CubeSat, and the Future-SM3 6U CubeSat, Futura-SM3, were respectively launched and successfully operated with an ARTICA system onboard. These two new missions extend the ARTICA flight heritage after the earlier UrsaMaior, 1-Kuns, and Alpha missions, launched in 2017, 2018 and 2020 respectively (21). The Planetary Society’s LightSail-2 was a 3U CubeSat mission with a solar sail launched in June 2019 and deployed from the Prox-1 satellite once in orbit. The mission demonstrated that solar sail technology can be used in LEO by modifying its orbital altitude over the course of the mission. The 32 m 2 sail was able to extend the mission lifetime by reducing orbital decay and on some occasions, it was also able to overcome drag entirely. In late November 2022, the mission successfully re-entered the atmosphere according to orbital predictions (22). Figure 13.5: [top] The dragNET module. [bottom] dragNET module attached to the GAzelle satellite prior to launch. Credit: MMA design. The Drag Augmentation Deorbiting System (ADEO) is a scalable drag sail developed by High Performance Space Structure Systems (HPS). There are various configurations of the ADEO sail: the ADEO-N series is tailored for small satellite missions of 20-250 kg, while the ADEO-M and ADEO-L target larger sizes, 100-700 kg and 500-1500 kg respectively. The ADEO-N series corresponds to sail sizes of 5±2 m 2 , while ADEO-M covers areas within 15 ± 5 m 2 . There are other smaller versions as well for picosatellites (ADEO-P) and CubeSats (ADEO-C) in particular, and the option to configure the sail size according to customer needs. Various configurations of the ADEO-N product family have been tested already (23). The NABEO-1, launched in 2018, attached to the center of a Rocket Lab Electron rocket Kick Stage and the sail was deployed 90 minutes after launch (24). In late December 2022, the ADEO-2 sail was deployed with a 10x10x10 cm package from the D-orbit ION-2 satellite carrier (Figure 13.6). For more information, contact ADEO@hps-gmbh.com. Figure 13.6: The ADEO-2 system deployed in LEO in December 2022, picture captured by the D-orbit’s ION spacecraft carrier. Credit: HPS GmbH, Germany (www.hps-gmbh.com). Gama launched its first spacecraft mission, a 6U CubeSat named Gama Alpha, in January 2023 into a ~550 km LEO and is currently still in orbit. This first technology demonstration mission aims to test the deployment and control of their 73.3 m 2 solar sail, and the final phase of the mission will use the sail to rapidly deorbit the satellite (25). SBUDNIC, shown in Figure 13.7, and designed and built by Brown University students with support from D-Orbit, AMSAT-Italy, La Sapienza-University of Rome, and NASA Rhode Island Space Grant, demonstrated a practical, low-cost method to cut down on space debris. Rather than taking debris out of orbit after it becomes a problem, this $30 drag device made from Kapton polyimide can be added onto satellites to radically reduce how long they’re in space. SBUDNIC was launched on a SpaceX rocket May 2022 as part of the Transporter 5 ridesharing mission. The plastic drag sail was deployed at about 520 kilometers and the satellite re-entered August 2023, about five years ahead of schedule (26). Figure 13.7: SBUDNIC CubeSat with drag sail made from Kapton polyimide film. Credit: Brown University. The Advanced Composite Solar Sail System (ACS3) was a mission developed at NASA Langley and NASA Ames that consisted of a spacecraft that deployed an 81 m 2 solar sail in a 1000 km sun-synchronous orbit (see Figure 13.8). The sail, composed of a combination of composite materials with distinct properties, was deployed using lightweight booms from a 12U CubeSat bus, developed by NanoAvionics. ACS3 launched in April 2024 (27). Although the main objective of the mission to show the propulsive capabilities of the solar sail were not achieved, the sail was successfully deployed prior to decommissioning in 2026. Figure 13.8: The ACS3 sail fully deployed during its pre-integration fit test. Credit: NASA Langley. TechEdSat (Passive) Exo-Brake Series The Technology Educational Satellite program, also known as TechEdSat-n (TES-n), at NASA Ames Research Center (ARC) has contributed significantly to the development of drag devices. It consists of a series of nanosatellite technology demonstrations in collaboration with several universities including San Jose State University and the University of Idaho (28). One of the main goals of the program is to test and improve deorbiting techniques and develop a unique targeting capability with their own drag device design known as the Exo-Brake. Being used as both a passive and a controlled active deorbit system, the Exo-Brake is an atmospheric braking system that is distinguished from other drag devices with its parachute qualities rather than solar-sail behavior due to its tension-based structural elements (see Figure 13.9). This is fundamental for accurate deorbit targeting since the device must retain its shape without collapsing during those critical reentry moments near the atmosphere interface (~100 km altitude), known as the Von Karman line (32). Development of the Exo-Brake is funded by the Entry Systems Modeling project within the NASA Space Technology Mission Directorate’s (STMD) Game Changing Development (GCD) program. Figure 13.9: TechEdSat-10 aft-imaging captures Exo-Brake deployment July 2020 (29). Credit: NASA. The Exo-Brake was first implemented as a passive deorbit device on TES-3 and TES-4, and then on TES-5 and TES-7. In comparison to other objects without a disposal device, the TES-7 flight is shown with other objects deployed from the same carrier, as seen in Figure 13.10. With a low ballistic coefficient induced by the deployed Exo-Brake, TES-7 re-entered in approximately 1.3 years from an initial 500 km orbit. This design incorporated a compact, low volume gas-generator cartridge to inflate the Exo-Brake struts. Figure 13.10: TES-7 deorbit compared to other deployed objects from the same carrier. Credit: NASA/Virgin Galactic. More recently, a simpler mechanical deployment scheme was developed (patent pending) that improves packaging performance by increasing the deployed-drag-area-to-stowage-volume ratio, as applied to TES-11. This has been further miniaturized for TES-22 which was launched in January 2025 as a test for a proposed future Thermosphere Test Probe (TTP) to be part of a small cohort during solar coronal events. The passive Exo-brake (not drag-modulated for deorbit targeting) has advanced recently for disposal activities to meet the new 5-year deorbit lifetime requirement. Table 13-1 provides a comprehensive overview of TES-n missions with passive Exo-Braking capability. Table 13-1: Passive TechEdSat-N Spacecraft TES-n mission (Volume) Deployment (month, year) Deorbit Duration Reentry Year Nominal Drag Area (m 2 ) Deployed Orbit Alt. & Inc. Technology Tested Notes (ref) TES-1 (1U) October 2012 May 2013 NA 412 km, 51.7° (33) TES-2 (1U) April 2013 April 2013 NA 223 km, 51.6° First test of Iridium (34) TES-3 (3U) November 2013 January 2014 0.35 413 km, 51.6° Original Passive Exo-Brake TES-4 (3U) March 2015 April 2015 0.35 398 km, 51.6° Upgraded Exo-Brake design TES-5 (3.5U) March 2017 July 2017 0.35 403 km, 51.6° Two-state Drag Modulated Exo-Brake for targeted re-entry (35) TES-6 (3.5U) November 2017 May 2018 0.564 402 km, 51.7° Variable Exo-Brake settings (36) TES-7 (2U) January 2021 May 2022 1.2 499 km, 60.7° High Packing Density Exo-Brake (37) TES-9 (3U) Planned TBD – – Automatic deorbiting using the Exo-Brake system TES-11 (6U-W) July 2024 February 2026 0.790 508 km, 97.4° Advanced disposal Exo-Brake mechanism Table 13‑2: Drag Sail Missions Product / Mission Manufacturer Mission host and launch mass Device mass (kg) Initial orbit (alt and inc.) Launch Year Deployment Year Drag Area ( m 2 ) NanoSail-D2 NASA MSFC/ARC FASTSAT (4.2 kg) N/A 650 km 72 deg 2010 2011 10 Drag-Net MMA Design ORS-3 Deployed a Minotaur Upper Stage (100 kg) 2.8 N/A 2016 2016 14 Drag-Net MMA Design General Atomics GAzelle Satellite 2.8 N/A 2022 TBC 14 Icarus-1 Cranfield Aerospace Solutions SSTL TechDemoSat-1 (157 kg) 3.5 635 km 2014 2019 6.7 Icarus-3 Cranfield Aerospace Solutions Carbonite-1 (80 kg) 2.3 650 km 98 deg 2015 2018 2 DOM Cranfield Aerospace Solutions ESEO (45 kg) 0.5 572 × 588 km 97.77 deg 2018 2020 0.5 Terminator Tape Tethers Unlimited, Inc. Prox-1 (71 kg) 0.808 717 km 24 deg 2019 2019 10.5 DragSail Surrey Space Centre InflateSail (3.2 kg) N/A 505 km 97.44 deg 2017 2017 10 Exo-Brake NASA TechEdSat 5 (3.4 kg) N/A 405 km 51.5 deg 2014 2015 0.35 Exo-Brake NASA TechEdSat 7 (3 kg) N/A 485 x 513 km 60.7 deg 2021 2021 1.2 Exo-Brake NASA TechEdSat 13 (4 kg) N/A 499 x 509 km 45 deg 2022 2022 0.083 Exo-Brake NASA TechEdSat 15 (4.5 kg) N/A 215 x 285 km 137 deg 2022 2022 0.087 removeDebris Surrey Space Centre removeDebris (100 kg) N/A 405 km 51.5 deg 2018 2019 16 CanX-7 UTIAS-SFL 3U CubeSat (3.6 kg) 0.8 (4 modules of 0.200) 688 km 98 deg 2016 2017 4 NABEO-1 HPS 1U CubeSat (attached to Rocket Lab Kick Stage) 0.85 500 km 2018 2018 2.5 ADEO-2 HPS 1U CubeSat (attached to the D-orbit ION carrier) 3.4 N/A 2021 2022 3.6 ADEO-Cube series HPS 1-50 kg 0.5 LEO N/A N/A 2 ADEO-N series HPS 20-250 kg 0.8 LEO N/A N/A 5±2 ADEO-M series HPS 100-700 kg 4 LEO N/A N/A 15±5 ADEO-L series HPS 500-1500 kg 9.5 LEO N/A N/A 20±100 ARTICA (ALPHA) NPC Spacemind 1U CubeSat 0.285 (0.3U) 5865 Km, 70.16 deg 2020 2020 2.2 ARTICA (FUTURA SM 3) NPC Spacemind 6U CubeSat 0.285 (0.3U) N/A 2023 N/A 2.2 ARTICA (DANTESAT) NPC Spacemind 3U CubeSat 0.285 (0.3U) 415 km 2022 2022 2.2 ARTICA (URSA MAIOR) NPC Spacemind 3U CubeSat 0.285 (0.3U) 450 km, 97.1 deg 2017 2019 2.2 ARTICA (1KUNS) NPC Spacemind 1U CubeSat 0.285 (0.3U) N/A 2018 2019 2.2 LightSail – 2 The Planetary Society 3U CubeSat N/A 720 km 2019 2022 32 ACS3 NASA 12U CubeSat 1 (6U) 1000 km SSO 2024 2024 81 Gama ALPHA Gama 6U CubeSat N/A 550 km 2023 N/A 73.3 NANO dragsail (28) Frond Space Systems 2U-12U CubeSat 0.25 <650 km 2025 N/A 1 MICRO dragsail (29) Frond Space Systems 50-100 kg spacecraft <1600 <650 km 2025 N/A 10 13.3.2 Deployable Booms Deployable booms, while not strictly a deorbit device themselves, are a vital component of many deorbit systems. They are structural components that can be stowed during launch, then deployed once in space to provide the support structure required for various drag sail designs. More specific information regarding deployable booms can be found in the Structures, Materials, and Mechanisms chapter. Missions The University of Florida developed the Drag Deorbit Device (D3) and De-Orbit Control System 2U CubeSat that provides both attitude stabilization and modulation of the satellite drag area at the same time, making the overall solution an alternative to regular ADCS units. This technology was licensed exclusively to Orbotic Systems who have changed and Trademarked the product title “D3 De-Orbit Drag Device”. Four 3.7 m long tape-spring booms form the D3, which can deorbit a 15 kg satellite from an altitude of 700 km. A final design has already been tested and simulated, including thermal-vacuum and fatigue testing (38). Figure 13.11 shows two images of the final design. The mission was selected by NASA through the CubeSat Launch Initiative, and on September 6, 2022, D3 was successfully placed in orbit (39). Figure 13.11: D3 CAD design (left), boom inside thermal vacuum chamber (center), and prototype design (right). Credits: Omar et al., 2019, and Martin et al., 2019. 13.3.3 Electromagnetic Tethers In addition to drag sails, electromagnetic tethers have proven to be an effective deorbit method. This technology uses a conductive tether to generate an electromagnetic force as the tether system moves relative to Earth’s magnetic field. Missions Tethers Unlimited (now Amergint Technologies) developed Terminator Tape that uses a burn-wire release mechanism to actuate the ejection of the terminator’s cover, deploying a 70 m long conductive tape at the conclusion of the small spacecraft mission. There are currently two main modules. The first, NSTT for NanoSats, has a mass of 0.808 kg. The second, CSTT, is made for CubeSats and has a mass of 0.083 kg. Figure 13.12 shows an image of both systems. The 70 m long NSTT has been implemented in the 71 kg Prox-1 satellite, launched in mid-2019 by AFRL (40). DragRacer, an experiment jointly developed by Tethers Unlimited, Millennium Space Systems, RocketLab, and TriSept Corp., consisted of one satellite (Alchemy) equipped with Terminator Tape and another (Augury) without it, to characterize the tape performance. Alchemy reentered in July 2021 while Augury is still in orbit (41). Figure 13.12: Image of the NSTT (left) and the CSTT modules. Credit: Tethers Unlimited. 13.3.4 Natural Deorbiting Highways Finally, analysis has shown that there exists a natural network of what may be called “deorbiting highways or corridors” (42). Judicious injection into specific orbits in LEO may result in relatively rapid natural orbital decay. There exist dynamical resonances associated with solar radiation pressure, lunisolar perturbations and Earth’s gravitational harmonics. In turn, these dynamical resonances are associated with natural deorbiting corridors; furthermore, their effectiveness is proportional to the spacecraft’s area-to-mass ratio. These LEO dynamical resonances are expressed as a network of specific orbital initial conditions. For example, for a nearly circular initial orbit at an altitude of 700 km, and assuming a typical value of the area-to-mass ratio, a spacecraft with an initial inclination of approximately 41 degrees will have a shorter lifetime in orbit than an identical spacecraft with an initial inclination of 20 degrees. The former example is an example of leveraging a natural deorbit corridor associated with these dynamical resonances. The downside of using this approach is that small satellites (a) often go as “piggyback” payloads to larger missions and do not have the luxury of picking an orbit, and (b) often go to sun-synchronous orbits which for typical area-to-mass ratio values are not dynamically close to these natural deorbiting corridors. 13.4 State-of-the-Art – Active Deorbit Systems While it is still less common to design an active deorbiting system on a spacecraft directly due to mass, size, and power constraints, other methods enable active decommissioning. Several companies, such as Astroscale and ClearSpace, offer active spacecraft-based deorbit services and have already started initial technology demonstration missions to advance their deorbit systems. These deorbit systems consist of separate, dedicated spacecraft that attach to decommissioned satellites to place them into decaying or graveyard orbits. This niche is quite appropriate for the growing number of constellations that are planned to launch over the next few years. The NASA STD-8719.14C document stipulates that all NASA-sponsored spacecraft using controlled reentry must have a designed trajectory to ensure that any remaining debris does not impact landmasses. Specifically, debris with a kinetic energy exceeding 15 Joules must stay at least 370 km away from any foreign landmass, or within 50 km from any territory of the United States or the permanent ice pack of Antarctica (3). This requirement implies that spacecraft must be equipped with improved active deorbit capabilities. There have been advances on deorbit technologies that can either be used on a specific mission or provided through commercial services. This section highlights some of the main stakeholders that are working towards the implementation of active space debris removal services, and some promising technologies that can potentially be used for actively deorbiting spacecraft in the future. 13.4.1 Active Debris Removal Hardware This section focuses on efforts to develop technologies for active debris removal. These include the active control of the Exo-Brake on the TechEdSat series for targeted re-entry, as well as potential and upcoming missions dedicated to actively removing orbital debris using drag sails, deployable booms, and electromagnetic tethers. In addition, some upcoming missions include orbiting vehicles to execute active operations to remove small satellites at end of life. TechEdSat (Active) Exo-Brake Series The Exo-Brake design has evolved from a fully passive device to one with active control capability that can target a specific reentry location by adjusting the drag device for the optimal ballistic coefficient based on the satellite’s orbital determination. The TES-6 mission first implemented this technology with a 3.5U CubeSat and deployed the Exo-Brake from the rear and targeted reentry over NASA Wallops Flight Facility. Although the target area was overshot, analysis shows that a low 4–5 kg/m 2 ballistic coefficient configuration would have yielded suitable results if placed at 300 km (see Figure 13.13). TES-6 successfully demonstrated the reentry experiment and the command/control capability by overflying Wallops right before reentering. The Exo-Brake targeting technology has been demonstrated on TES-6 and TES-10 missions and was going to be implemented on TES-8 except a power system failure occurred after Exo-Brake deployment but before targeting. The Exo-Brake on TES-10 was an improved version of the previous TES-5 and TES-6 devices with a wider ballistic coefficient range (6–18 kg m 2 ) to enable better control authority for a targeted deorbit flight test over Wallops (37). TES-13 and TES-15 used variations of the TES-7 design for active, controlled mission deorbiting (43). Table 13-3 provides a comprehensive overview of the different TES-n missions. Table 13-3: Active TechEdSat-N Spacecraft TES-n mission (Volume) Deployment (month, year) Reentry (month, year) Nominal Drag Area (m 2 ) Deployed Orbit Alt. & Inc. Technology Tested Notes TES-8 (6U) January 2019 April 2020 0.5 406 km, 51.6° Hot Exo-Brake; improved version of TES-5 and -6 designed for continued operation in high temperature environment TES-10 (6U) July 2020 March 2021 0.564 416 km, 51.6° largest iteration Exo-Brake and performed targeting experiment TES-13 (3U) January 2022 July 2024 0.087 504 km 45° Autonomous navigation and targeted reentry; TES-15 (3U) October 2022 October 2022 0.087 250 km, 137° Hot Exo-Brake re-entry test; unable to complete full test TES-22 (1U) January 2025 TBD 2.00 ~500 km Rapid Disposal (Exo- Brake/Heliophysics Test Probe) TES-23 (3U) March 2026 TBD – – Rapid Disposal (Exo- Brake), RADSET RemoveDebris Consortium Partners The RemoveDebris mission focused on testing several active debris removal experiments with different technologies on mock targets in LEO. In total, the RemoveDebris spacecraft carried two 2U CubeSats, a net, harpoon, laser ranging instrument, and a drag sail. One experiment deployed a 5 m net toward simulated space debris using one of the CubeSats, DebrisSat 1, and a balloon. Both DebrisSat 1 and the balloon were captured at ~11 m and maneuvered to a lower altitude, re-entering in March 2019 (44). Another active debris technology used a harpoon and a deployable target where the target platform attached to a 1.5 m boom was deployed from the main spacecraft, and a tethered harpoon was fired at 19 m/s to strike the center of the platform. Once that occurred, the boom that connected both harpoon and target platform joined the harpoon and target platform at one end. However, a tether secured the target in place, avoiding the creation of new debris. This resulted in the first space demonstration of harpoon-based debris—with a dry mass of 4.3 kg—capture technology. 13.4.2 Active Debris Removal / Spacecraft Reentry Services This section focuses on commercial efforts to provide space debris removal services. This commonly involves a “servicer” spacecraft released from a host spacecraft that rendezvous with an object, captures it via attachment or docking method, and releases it in a lower altitude for reentry. Several core technologies, such as autonomous navigation, rendezvous and proximity operations (RPO), and robotics, are being developed by NASA and international space agencies, academics and researchers, and the commercial industry to boost the active debris removal service. Some deorbit removal services require the spacecraft to be fitted with a deorbit fixture for their servicer spacecraft to attach to. In response to the surge of small spacecraft constellations, deorbit fixtures are now being integrated into several new spacecraft constellations. Some companies, like Momentus, are more focused on in-orbit servicing capabilities as a whole that include deorbit and removal applications. Those companies with a deeper affiliation with in-orbit servicing are featured in the Orbital Transfer / Maneuvering Vehicles (OTV/OMV) section of the Integrated, Launch, Deployment, and Orbital Transfer chapter. Astroscale Holdings Inc. Astroscale aims to provide services that will address the end-of-life (EOL) scenario of newly launched satellites and be proactively engaged in active debris removal. They are involved in collaborations with a variety of governmental and international organizations (such as the US government, ESA, the European Union, or the United Nations) that aim to address space debris removal. Since 2022, they are responsible for the Cleaning Outer Space Mission through Innovative Capture (COSMIC) mission design as part of the Active Debris Removal (ADR) mission with the UK Space Agency that will remove two defunct British spacecraft in 2028 (45). Astroscale is collaborating with other efforts to implement their Generation 2 Docking Plate on future spacecraft for future removal activities or to remove critical debris such as rocket upper stages or defunct satellites (46). As part of JAXA’s Commercial Removal of Debris Demonstration (CRD2) initiative—which focuses on the removal of large Japanese-made space debris in two mission phases—Astroscale developed the capture mechanism that enables close proximity operations on-orbit. Phase I consisted of a 150-kg Active Debris Removal by Astroscale-Japan (ADRAS-J) satellite that identified and characterized a rocket upper stage on-orbit. It was launched in July 2024 and maintained a constant distance of 50 m and began its decommissioning in early 2026 (47). As part of their EOL campaign, the End-of-Life Services by Astroscale demonstration (ELSA-d) mission launched on March 22, 2021 and has successfully demonstrated EOL technologies in LEO with Astroscale’s docking plate (48). ELSA-d consisted of two spacecraft: a “servicer” and “client” where the client spacecraft represented a piece of space debris that the servicer rendezvoused with and eventually attached to. With respective launch masses ~175 and ~17 kg, the servicer and client spacecraft repeatedly performed several complex demonstrations including magnetic capture and rendezvous operations of both tumbling and non-tumbling cases. In January 2022, the servicer spacecraft successfully released the client counterpart and initiated autonomous relative navigation over the course of multiple orbits as part of the mission plan. As of 2024, the servicer spacecraft is expected to re-enter in 3.5 years. Planned for launch in 2026, the ELSA-M demonstration mission will leverage lessons learned for magnetic docking and autonomous navigation technologies demonstrated in the precursor ELSA-d mission. ELSA-M will dock with and remove a OneWeb spacecraft using Astroscale’s compatible magnetic capture mechanism (49). OneWeb plans to have Astroscale’s docking plate on their future spacecraft for this continued deorbit service (50). An important note is that several science missions are undertaking extensive efforts to make their spacecraft magnetically neutral, which may be a concern for magnetic docking methods. ClearSpace Another company that is solely focused on the design and execution of space debris removal is ClearSpace. By advancing robotics to support in-orbit servicing applications such as disposal, transport, inspection, assembly, manufacturing, repair, and recycling, ClearSpace aims to help establish a market for in-orbit servicing and debris removal. Collaborating with ESA, ClearSpace-1 is a space debris removal mission designed to locate and capture a non-cooperative, tumbling object via a four-armed robotic device (51). The object to be removed was originally a 100 kg VEGA upper stage, however in August 2023, it collided with another piece of space debris (52). The mission will now rendezvous with Project for On-Board Autonomy (PROBA)-1 —ESA’s first spacecraft with fully autonomous technologies, launched 20 years ago—capture it with a group of robotic arms, and then both spacecraft will be deorbited together to a lower orbit for final disintegration in the atmosphere. ClearSpace entered the preliminary design review in October 2023 of the Clearing of the LEO Environment with Active Removal (CLEAR) mission currently projected to launch in the second half of 2026. This study is designed to remove at least two UK non-operational satellites that have been in orbit for more than 10 years in a ~700 km orbit and have a natural deorbit time longer than 100 years (51). The CLEAR spacecraft features unfolding arms used to capture and release target objects. D-Orbit Known for their transportation services onboard their ION CubeSat carrier platform, D-Orbit also provides an external solid motor booster specifically for deorbiting purposes. This independent module, known as D-Orbit Decommissioning Device (D3), shown in Figure 13.13, is a solution that is optimized for end-of-life maneuvers and was first demonstrated in 2017 (53). This technology would need to be added prior to launch and is activated from the ground or host spacecraft. More information on the ION is in Chapter 10: Launch, Integration, Deployment, and Orbital Transport . Figure 13.13: D-Orbit D3 module. Credit: D-orbit. Voyager Space The main objective of Voyager Space is advancing humanity’s presence in space and on Earth. They focus on space exploration and infrastructure, microgravity research, and technological innovations that will contribute to a sustainable space economy and enhance humanity’s future. As part of their in-space servicing and assembly, they developed the DogTag, which is an inexpensive, lightweight, versatile, and advanced grappling interface. This fixture enables small spacecraft to be captured by various mechanisms such as magnetic grapples, mechanical arms, electrostatic or gecko adhesive, and even harpoons. This interface allows for spacecraft servicing or decommissioning and is compatible with other techniques to accommodate different mission needs (54). Figure 13.14 includes an image of the flight DogTags and a table of its main features. Since 2021, OneWeb includes the DogTags grappling fixture on their launched satellites to make space more sustainable (55). In total, over 500 DogTags have already been launched to space. Figure 13.14: DogTag prototype. Credit: Voyager Space. Kall Morris Inc. Another orbital debris research and solution development company with a focus on active debris removal techniques is Kall Morris Inc (KMI). They are developing a commercially viable system designed to capture and detumble an object— whether a client satellite at end-of-life or uncooperating debris object—and release it into a deorbit altitude (56). Their Laelaps spacecraft will rendezvous with and attach itself to a target object using a multi-armed, articulated robotic device called REACCH. As depicted in Figure 13.15 {left}, REACCH will capture, move, and release the object in a deorbit altitude. Gecko adhesion is incorporated on the REACCH tentacles in order to attach to the debris object and easily release the object when the tentacles retract. With the assistance of the University of Southern California, by May of 2025 REACCH completed Astrobee-enabled International Space Station (ISS) testing sponsored through the Center for the Advancement of Science in Space (CASIS) 2025 (57). Laelaps in-space testing is anticipated in Q4 2027, with component ground testing leading up to that time. Figure 13.15 {right} is an image of REACCH on the ISS. In 2027, the Space Machines Company’s orbital transport vehicle will enter lunar orbit to rendezvous with and capture debris in lunar orbit. The Australian-built Optimus orbital transport vehicle (OTV) will rendezvous with, capture, and return hazardous debris from lunar orbit to Earth. Along the way, it will carry Australian payloads to lunar orbit for testing and development of lunar exploration communications and situational awareness infrastructure before returning them to Earth. Figure 13.15: {left} REACCH interpretation and {right} REACCH during ISS Capture testing with Astrobee. Credit: Kall Morris Inc. Credits: Kall Morris Inc. TransAstra was awarded a Phase 2 Small Business Innovation Research contract from NASA to continue developing their inflatable capture bag technology for space debris remediation. This device will be capable of enveloping and subsequently removing a non-cooperative object in orbit. A collaboration with ThinkOrbital, a company based in Colorado, includes the transport of the removed debris to an on-orbit processing plant. 13.5 Summary Space debris regulations are becoming more stringent. Consequently, several deorbit technologies have matured significantly in recent years. Traditionally passive systems have been more common, have flown on various missions, and have reached TRL 9 following successful demonstrations. Drag sails are the main technology for passive systems, and several companies have already commercialized and brought these products to market. Other systems such as electromagnetic tethers, deployable booms, or the NASA TechEdSat series Exo-Brake have also been prototyped and demonstrated in space, now with navigation capabilities and increased reliability. The investment in active systems has also grown significantly. Several companies are offering transfer vehicles to remove debris or deorbit spacecraft at the end of their mission, and compatible systems for spacecraft rendezvous and removal are being developed in parallel. As an example, the RemoveDebris mission has successfully tested two different active methods: a net and a harpoon for potential future implementation in active debris removal operations. Companies such as Astroscale and ClearSpace are developing missions to remove defunct satellites and are launching precursor technology demonstration spacecraft in the initial stages of their roadmaps. In conclusion, the various deorbit technologies have seen a significant TRL increase since the last iteration of this report, and their robustness is expected to continue improving as demand for deorbiting services increases with additional launches and evolving regulations. For feedback solicitation, please email: arc-sst-soa@mail.nasa.gov . Please include a business email so someone may contact you further. References European Space Agency. “Space Debris by the Numbers,” December 6, 2023. [Online] Available at: https://www.esa.int/Space_Safety/Space_Debris/Space_debris_by_the_numbers Federal Communications Commission. “Mitigation of Orbital Debris: Second Report and Order,” June 21, 2004. Available at: https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-04-130A1.pdf NASA. “Process for Limiting Orbital Debris,” NASA-STD-8719.14C. November 5, 2021. National Orbital Debris Implementation Plan, of the Orbital Debris Interagency Working Group, National Science and Security Council, July 2022. Liou, J., NASA. Orbital Debris Briefing, Executive Office of the President/Office of Science and Technology Policy (EOP/OSTP) Briefing, Washington D.C., December 8, 2017. Available at: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/api/citations/20170011662/downloads/20170011662.pdf NASA. “NASA Procedural Requirements for Limiting Orbital Debris and Evaluating the Meteoroid and Orbital Debris Environments,” NPR 8715.6B. February 16, 2017-2024. [Online] Available at: https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov/displayDir.cfm?t=NPR&c=8715&s=6B National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2011. Limiting Future Collision Risk to Spacecraft: An Assessment of NASA’s Meteoroid and Orbital Debris Programs. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/13244. Federal Communications Commission. “Space Innovation; Mitigation of Orbital Debris in the New Space Age,” FCC-Fact Sheet. September 8, 2022. Available at: https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/DOC-387024A1.pdf Khlystov, N. and Schrogl, K. “Space Industry Debris Mitigation Recommendations,” Future of Space Network – Sustainable Space Initiative, Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution, World Economic Forum document, June 2023. World Economic Forum. “Space Sustainability Rating,” [Online] Available at: https://www.weforum.org/projects/space-sustainability-rating/ Foust, J. “U.N. opens “window of opportunity” to improve space governance” spacenews.com. June 14, 2023. ]Online] Available at: https://spacenews.com/u-n-opens-window-of-opportunity-to-improve-space-governance/ Federal Aviation Administration. “FAA Proposed Rule Would Reduce the Growth of Debris from Commercial Space Vehicles,” September 20, 2023. [Online] Available at: https://www.faa.gov/newsroom/faa-proposed-rule-would-reduce-growth-debris-commercial-space-vehicles National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. “Satellite Drag,” [Online] Available at: https://www.swpc.noaa.gov/impacts/satellite-drag Cotten, B., Bennett, I. and Zee, R. E. “On-Orbit Results from the CanX-7 Drag Sail Deorbit Mission,” 10th Annual Small Satellite Conference, August 2006, Logan Utah. Underwood, C. et al. “InflateSail de-orbit flight demonstration results and follow-on drag-sail applications,” Acta Astronautica, 2019, Vol. 162, pages 344-358. ISSN: 0094-5765 Palla, C., Kingston, H, and Hobbs, S. Damstadt: “Development of Commercial Drag-Augmentation for Small Satellites.” ESA Space debris Office, Ed. T. Flohrer & F. Schimtz, 2017. Applied Aerospace and Defense, “Applied Invests in Deorbit Systems with Acquisition,” February 24, 2026, [Online] Available at: https://appliedaero.space/applied-invests-in-deorbit-systems-with-acquisition MMA Design. “dragNET™ De-Orbit System,” MMA Design: Products. 2020 [Online] Available at: https://mmadesignllc.com/product/dragnet-de-orbit-system/ MMA Design. “Another MMA dragNET De-orbit Systems Launches with GAzelle Satellite.” [Online] Available at: https://mmadesignllc.com/2022/10/dragnet-deorbit-launches-with-gazelle-satellite/ NPC Spacemind. “Artica.” [Online] Available at: https://indico.esa.int/event/234/contributions/3929/attachments/3014/3634/Clean_Space_ARTICA_Present.pdf Cowing, K. “Spacemind Successfully Launches Three Italian Nanosatellites Into Orbit From The International Space Station.” Press Release, Spacemind. February 2, 2023. [Online] Available at: https://spaceref.com/space-commerce/spacemind-successfully-launches-three-italian-nanosatellites-into-orbit-from-the-international-space-station/ Davis, J. “LightSail 2 completes mission with atmospheric reentry.” The Planetary Society. November 17, 2022. [Online] Available at: https://www.planetary.org/articles/lightsail-2-completes-mission Laube, P. et al. “ADEO-N – Deployable Passive De-Orbit Sail Subsystem Enabling Space Debris Mitigation for CubeSats, SmallSats and Constellations,” DLR German Aerospace Center, D-Orbit S.p.A, European Space Agency. Sinn, T., Garcia Hemme, H., Gehly, S., and Le May, S. “The NABEO-1 CubeSat dragsail launched onboard Rocket Lab’s “It’s Business Time: Design, Testing, Launch and De-Orbit Mission,” 33rd Annual Small Satellite Conference Presentation, August 2019, Logan Utah. “Gama’s revolutionary propulsion Gama Alpha Solar Sail mission launches.” satenews.com. January 4, 2023. [Online] Available at: https://news.satnews.com/2023/01/04/gamas-revolutionary-propulsion-gama-alpha-solar-sail-mission-launches “Satellite built by Brown students and launched by SpaceX shows a low-cost way to reduce space junk.” News from Brown. March 15, 2023. [Online] Available at: https://www.brown.edu/news/2023-03-15/sbudnic Wilkie, K. “The NASA Advanced Composite Solar Sail System (ACS3) Flight Demonstration: A Technology Pathfinder for Practical Smallsat Solar Sailing.” 35th Annual Small Satellite Conference, August 2021, Logan, Utah. B. Taylor, V. Lewis, S. Shore, S. Schaffler, A. Tresoldi, M. Longato, S. Luo, and G. Aglietti. “Te Pūnaha Ātea -1 (TPA-1), a Capability Development and Validation Mission From New Zealand.” Technical Poster Session 3. 37th Annual Small Satellite Conference, August 2023, Logan, Utah. Frond Space Systems. “MICRO Dragsail: Effect deorbiting for Microsatellites in LEO.” [Online] Available at: https://frond.space/products/micro-sail/ NASA. “What are NASA’s Technology Educational Satellites?” September 20, 2022. [Online] Available at: https://www.nasa.gov/ames/techedsat Tavares, F. “TechEDsat-10 Deploys from the Space Station,” NASA.gov. August 5, 2020. [Online] Available at: https://www.nasa.gov/image-feature/ames/techedsat-10-deploys M. Murbach et al. “The Exo-Brake as an Inexpensive Means of Achieving Sample Return from Low Earth Orbit – Recent Flight Tests.” Washington, D.C.: 70th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), 2019. M. Murbach et al. “The TechEdSat-N Series: A Collaborative Technology Development Platform in the Nano-Satellite Form Factor.” Meeting: International Space Station Research & Development Conference. July 23-26, 2018. NASA HQ. M. Murbach et al. “The TechEdSat-N and ETC Series.” October 23, 2017. M. Murbach et al. “TechEdSat 5 / PhoneSat 5 (T5/P5),” 30th Annual Small Satellite Conference, August 2016, Logan, Utah. [Online] Available at: https://digitalcommons.usu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3490&context=smallsat M. Murbach et al. “Successes with Exo-Brake Development and Targeting for Future Sample Return Capability TES-6, 7, 8, Flight Experiments.” June 9, 2019. M. Mooney-Rivkin et al. “TechEdSat 7, 10, 13, 15: Exo-Brake Experiments on the ISS, First Virgin Orbit, and First Firefly-Alpha Test Flights.” CubeSat Developers Workshop, 2023. Available at: http://mstl.atl.calpoly.edu/~workshop/archive/2023/presentations/2023_Day1_Session1_Brock_MooneyRivki_TechEdSat.pdf Martin, T., Omar, S., and Bevilacqua, R. “Controlled Spacecraft Re-Entry of a Drag De-Orbit Device (D3),” Journal of Undergraduate Research, 2019, Vol. 21. Satellite Evolution. “De-orbit Drag Device (D3) successfully placed in orbit by NanoRacks.” September 14, 2022. [Online] Available at: https://www.satelliteevolution.com/post/de-orbit-drag-device-d3-successfully-placed-in-orbit-by-nanoracks Stankey, H. C. and Hoyt, R. P. “In-Flight Performance of the Terminator Tape End-of-Life Deorbit Module,” 35th Annual Small Satellite Conference, August 2021, Logan Utah. S. Bilén, “Space tethers demonstrate deorbit capability,” Aerospace America, December 1, 2021, [Online] Available at: https://aerospaceamerica.aiaa.org/year-in-review/space-tethers-demonstrate-deorbit-capability/ Alessi, E. M., Schettino, G., Rossi, A. and Valsecchi, G. B “Natural Highways for End-of-Life Solutions in the LEO region.”, 2018. arXiv: 1805.05726v1. M. Murbach et al. “BrainStack: A Platform for Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning Collaborative Experiments on a Nano-Satellite,” 2023. 37th Annual Small Satellite Conference, Logan Utah. Aglietti, G. et al. “The active space debris removal mission RemoveDebris. Part 2: in orbit operations,” Acta Astronautica, Elsevier, 2020, Vol. 168, pp. 310-322. Astroscale. “Astroscale’s UK National ADR Mission COSMIC Achieves Significant Progress in Space Cleanup Efforts.” April 22, 2024. [Online] Available at: https://astroscale.com/astroscales-uk-national-adr-mission-cosmic-achieves-significant-progress-in-space-cleanup-efforts/ Astroscale. “Astro Digital Embraces Responsible Satellite Operations with Astroscale’s Simple and Innovative Docking Plate Integration.” Press Release. July 31, 2023. [Online] Available at: https://astroscale.com/astro-digital-embraces-responsible-satellite-operations-with-astroscales-simple-and-innovative-docking-plate-integration/ Astroscale. “Astroscale’s ADRAS-J Mission Completes Operations, Begins Deorbit.” Mission Updates, March 25, 2026. [Online] Available at: https://www.astroscale.com/en/news/astroscales-adras-j-mission-completes-operations-begins-deorbit Astroscale. “Astroscale’s ELSA-d Finalizes De-Orbit Operations Marking Successful Mission Conclusion.” [Online] Available at: https://astroscale.com/astroscales-elsa-d-finalizes-de-orbit-operations-marking-successful-mission-conclusion/ Astroscale. “ELSA-M.” [Online] Available at: https://www.space.com/astroscale-elsa-m-space-debris-removal-funding Astroscale. “Astroscale UK Signs £2.5 Million Agreement to Develop Space Debris Removal Technology Innovations with OneWeb.” Press Release. May 24, 2021 [Online] Available at: https://astroscale.com/astroscale-uk-signs-2-5-million-agreement-to-develop-space-debris-removal-technology-innovations-with-oneweb/ European Space Agency. “ClearSpace-1.” [Online] Available at: https://www.esa.int/Space_Safety/ClearSpace-1 ClearSpace. “ClearSpace-1 Mission Changes in Response to Space Debris Collision to Go Leaner, Faster and Safer.” space.com. April 24, 2024. [Online] Available at: https://clearspace.today/clearspace-1-mission-changes-in-response-to-space-debris-collision-to-go-leaner-faster-and-safer D. Werner. “D-Orbit charts ambitious course for space logistics business,” Spacenews, June 15, 2022. [Online] Available at: https://spacenews.com/d-orbit-ambitions/ Voyager Space. “DogTags: Universal Grapple Fixture.” [Online] Available at: https://voyagerspace.com/innovate/in-space-servicing-assembly/ Maclay, T., Goff, J., Sheehan, J.P., and Han, E. “The development of commercially viable ADR services: Introduction of a small-satellite grappling interface,” 2020, Journal of Space Safety Engineering, Volume 7, Issue 3, pages 364 – 368. Kall Morris Inc. “Technologies: REACCH,” August 2024 [Online] Available at: https://www.kallmorris.com/reacch Northern Michigan University, “Alumni Company Captures Space Objects on the ISS,” Northern Today, July 15, 2025, [Online] Available at: https://news.nmu.edu/alumni-system-completes-first-commercial-capture State-of-the-Art of Small Spacecraft Technology S3VI Home State-of-the-Art (SoA) Summary SoA Chapters 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Complete Spacecraft Platforms 3.0 Power 4.0 In-Space Propulsion 5.0 Guidance, Navigation, and Control 6.0 Structures, Materials, and Mechanisms 7.0 Thermal Control 8.0 Small Spacecraft Avionics 9.0 Communications 10.0 Integration, Launch, and Deployment 11.0 Ground Data Systems and Mission Operations 12.0 Identification and Tracking Systems 13.0 Deorbit Systems Acknowledgements Keep Exploring Discover More Topics From NASA Space Technology Mission Directorate RTMD Small Spacecraft & Distributed Systems (SSDS) Flight Opportunities Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) / Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA explores the unknown in air and space, innovates for the benefit of humanity, and inspires the world through discovery. About NASA's Mission Join Us Home News & Events Multimedia NASA+ Missions Humans in Space Earth The Solar System The Universe Science Aeronautics Technology Learning Resources About NASA NASA en Español (opens in new tab) Follow NASA More NASA Social Accounts NASA Newsletters Sitemap For Media Privacy Policy FOIA No FEAR Act Office of the IG (opens in new tab) Budget & Annual Reports Agency Financial Reports Contact NASA Accessibility Page Last Updated: May 18, 2026 Page Editor: Sonja Caldwell Responsible NASA Official: Abigail Bowman Was this page helpful? Δ Was this page helpful? Yes No Submit × 